Executive Summary
	The advancements and innovations in technology of the 21st century have made major impacts on our society, our government, and our laws and polices.  With the dawn of the internet and telecommunications, the interpersonal communication of human society has forever changed.  We are now capable of real time interaction between peoples regardless of their geographic location.  
	In our post September 11th 2001 attack society, the United States government has major support in its monitoring of electronic communications of both citizens and non-citizens.  The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 1986 was enacted by the United States Congress to extend government restrictions on wire taps to include transmissions of electronic data by computer.  Since 1986, technology has advanced at great speed while electronic privacy law has mainly remained the same.
	Social media services such as Facebook and Twitter now have people all over the country sharing troves of information about themselves.  They share their personal photographs, location, and beliefs on these services.  This can prove to be problematic as once uploaded, their information can be seen by millions and captured before they delete or remove the information.  Furthermore, this personal information remains on these companies servers regardless of whether the user has deleted it or not.
	On October 26th, 2001 the USA PATRIOT Act was signed into law by President George W. Bush.  The act was a result of concerns of Americans and the United States government after the September 11th, 2001 terrorist attacks.  Congress rushed to enact legislation to strengthen security controls.  This essentially gives the government the right to go forward with surveillance procedures when deemed to help prevent terrorism.  Terrorism can be loosely defined so it is not difficult to brand a person or persons as possible terrorists or to have possible terrorist connections in order to collect their information.
	There are a number of necessary amendments that must be drafted to the ECPA and USA PATRIOT act in order to protect our rights to electronic and internet privacy.  Current loopholes that exist in our privacy laws must be closed to ensure that electronic information of internet users, especially United States citizens, receives full warrant protection.  Location information as transmitted by mobile devices should be protected from the government unless there are proper warrants issued.  Existing reporting requirements of wiretap orders must be extended to all types of law enforcement surveillance requests.  
	With the advent of the modern mobile phone, cultures and societies around the world have been greatly impacted.  People are now able to communicate instantly from around the world.  News and educational resources can be accessed anytime from nearly anywhere.  These great changes in technology have the potential for positive as well as negative unforeseen consequences.
	Today people now communicate with their various devices through forms other than phone calls, emails, or text messages.  There are messaging services, social media, and forums that are all accessed through the internet.  This is great for people who are unable to see each other in person whether they live a town over and are just busy or are across the globe in different time zones.  This may also have negative consequences.  More and more people are spending less time face to face and more time on the internet.  Some people believe this has hindered peoples socializing skills.
	Breaking news can now reach many people very quickly.  When a story breaks, alerts are pushed to users all over the world.  It is now much harder to stay in the dark and go hours without seeing that final score of a major sporting event or a terrible tragedy.  Educational resources on the internet can be accessed now from the devices in our pockets.  Students homework assignments can be researched, written, and submitted all from a mobile device connected to the internet.  With more and more electronic communications and transactions within our society, there is greater risk of a breach in personal and private information.
	There has been recent controversy surrounding the National Security Agency (NSA) and Edward Snowden.  Snowden is a former NSA contractor that just last year leaked several documents showing that the NSA has been gathering records of the communication of all Americans and that the National Security Agency has also defeated widely used encryption protocols so that it can read them.  This breaking or defeating of public encryption is a new moral hazard into which cryptography experts have fallen.
	The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) adopted a code ethics in 1992.  The first section of the code of ethics outlines fundamental ethical considerations.  One item stands out , “Be Honest and Trustworthy” which reads “ The honest computing professional will not make deliberately false or deceptive claims about a system or system design, but will instead provide full disclosure of all pertinent system limitations and problems.” (Code of Ethics, Section 1.3).  There are systems in which the NSA has already cracked and yet they are still used.
	Another item title “Respect the privacy of others” reads that “Computing and communication technology enables the collection and exchange of personal information on a scale unprecedented in the history of civilization. Thus there is increased potential for violating the privacy of individuals and groups. It is the responsibility of professionals to maintain the privacy and integrity of data describing individuals.” (Code of Ethics, Section 1.7).  All these forms of communication are vulnerable to theft and therefore it is the responsibility of the developers to ensure that our information can be safely transferred.  Furthermore it is the responsibility of the government to enforce this code of ethics through legislation when it concerns the privacy of internet users.
	The Electronic Communications Privacy Act and the Stored Wire Electronic Communications Act are commonly refereed together as the ECPA of 1986.  The ECPA was developed to update the Federal Wiretap Act of 1968 to apply to the interception of computer and other digital and electronic communications.  There have been several attempts to update the ECPA to keep up with the evolving technology such as the USA PATRIOT Act.
	The ECPA generally protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while those communications are being made, are in transit, and when they are stored on computers.  Title I of the ECPA is often referred to as the Wiretap Act.  It provide procedures for Federal, State, and other government officers to obtain judicial authorization of intercepting communications.  Title II of the ECPA is called the Stored Communications Act and is meant to protect the privacy of the contents of files stored by service providers and of records held about a subscriber.  Title III addresses trap and trace devices requiring government entities to obtain a court order authorizing the use of the trace devices.  

Proponents and Opponents of New Legislation
	People everyday are leaving large amounts of information about themselves on the internet without fully understanding the implications of their actions.  As of late there has been intensified calls for more to be done to protect the online privacy of individuals.  Not just by the government but by the major technology corporations that store these peoples information on their servers leaving it vulnerable to attack.  It is believed that people need to be educated on the possible consequences of their online actions and that the current situation merits new legislation regarding internet privacy.
	Social networks for example have greatly increased our ability to share large amounts of information online.  At the same time, they have increased the risk that companies, governments, and criminals may exploit the same information without a persons knowledge.  Government can play a substantial role in safeguarding privacy when it is directed by law to do so.  Opponents of the USA PATRIOT act recognized a solution would be to give judges greater authority to review warrant applications so that prosecutors could not gather electronic information unchecked. 
	Government agencies need to provide consumer and privacy protection more actively on behalf of internet users.  Companies everyday collect vast amounts of personal information for one identified purpose, but then go ahead and use the information for completely unrelated purposes.  There is a major market for big data and these corporations sell user information for big money to be used for advertising and marketing purposes.  These companies should not get a free pass from regulation because their users agreed to there vague privacy terms and policies.
	Many opponents of data collection by the government and proponents of new internet privacy protection do not understand that the private sector has become the primary means for the government to collect citizen’s data.  Government agencies are top clients of the big data firms and what they cannot get through the private sector, they seek warrants to legally collect data.  
	Consumer trust is essential in maintaining the social and economic benefits that networked technologies bring to the United States.  With confidence that companies will handle user information fairly and responsibly, consumer have turned to the internet to express creativity, form and maintain relationships, and engage in commerce.  The global connectivity of the internet allows for the rapid growth of the products or services of innovators.  American companies have led the way in providing these technologies benefitting in job creation and economic growth.  The existing framework of privacy protection in the United States effectively addresses some privacy issues but additional protections are necessary.  In 2012, the Obama administration set fourth the Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights to provide a baseline of clear protections for consumers.  The administration has encourages stakeholders to implement this bill of rights and has been working with Congress to enact theses rights through legislation.
	The basic views of the Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights includes several principles regarding consumer privacy protection on computer networks.  First principle addresses consumers having individual control over what personal data companies may collect from them.  The document also stresses transparency in that companies provide easily accessible and understandable information of their privacy and security practices.  They call for companies to respect the context in which consumer provide their personal data.  Essentially meaning that companies can only collect and use consumer data in a consistent context in which the data was provided.  There is an emphasis on security and accountability.  Consumers have a right to the secure and responsible handling of data.  Meaning no big screw ups by corporations who were unable to protect their consumers information from thieves.  
	The main purpose of the Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights is to deter internet companies form indiscriminate collection of personal information for targeted ads.  As a result, major companies such as Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo! have provided a “do not track” feature so that users may opt out of providing information.  This has been an excellent stride for providing greater privacy options and protection for internet users, but clearer and greater laws must be formulated and enacted so that all citizens of the United States are guaranteed protection online.
	In 2013, a bill passed in the California legislature called “The Right To Know Act”.  The bill would force major internet companies to reveal what personal information the have collected and reveal how they are using it.  There was major public support for the bill as it passed by a 69% to 29% margin.  This support for online privacy protection hasn't translated into strong legal protections because both the public has not been good about demanding privacy laws and the industry has been very good at blocking them.
	Silicon Valley technology companies had mounted a forceful campaign to kill the internet privacy bill in California.  15 major companies such as Google, Facebook, and Microsoft sent a letter demanding that the bill be shot down.  Their belief is that the bill would open up businesses to an avalanche of requests from users as well as costly lawsuits.  The American Civil Liberties Union feels that the companies are overreacting in an attempt to hide their intentions of practicing the collection of personal information of the users of their online services.   The technology companies however argue that The Right to Know Act will threaten their business models which allow them to provide their online services to their users for free.  
	The Right to Know Act does not limit the companies abilities to collect users personal information just requires that they be transparent.  The bill includes business friendly protections including a provision that the companies only need to provide accounting of data collection to their users every 12 months.  Despite all of the industry concerns, this privacy bill does not provide the complete and necessary protection to internet users.  For example, it does not prevent companies from selling user data to third party companies.  It will be a long and difficult journey for there to be robust privacy protection laws nationally or even globally.   
	In 1986, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act was enacted specifying standards for law enforcement access  to electronic communications and data.  It afforded important privacy protection standards to subscribers of emerging wireless and internet technologies.  Technology has advanced dramatically since 1986 and the ECPA has been outpaced.  
	As a result of these advancements, the ECPA is patchwork of confusing standards that have and continue to be inconsistently interpreted by the courts.  This confusion and inconsistencies have created uncertainty for both service providers and law enforcement agencies.  The ECPA can no longer be applied and practiced in a clear and consistent manner.  The vast amount of personal information generated by today’s digital world may no longer be adequately protected.  The time to update the ECPA is now.  Several groups including privacy advocates and major internet companies have reached an agreement that there must be a core set of principles to simplify and clarify privacy protections unifying the ECPA standards.  These will take into account changes in technology and subscriber usage.
	There are conflicting standards in todays ECPA.  There are set rules for government access to emails and stored files that are not consistent.  A single email is subject to multiple legal standards in its lifecycle depending on whether it is being typed, the moment it has been read by it’s recipient, and when it is stored with the email service provider.  Documents stored on personal computers are protected by the warrant requirement of the fourth amendment.  The ECPA however states that the same documents stored on service provider’s servers may not be subject to that warrant requirement.  